Hi everyone.
I'd like to introduce the next speaker.
Hi everybody.
We're going to be talking about tiles and some Dazz
le stuff.
For the folks listening on the stream, Haley is unable
to present, so we're going to do this instead.
I've got mic'd up.
So hi everyone.
Welcome to the slightly impromptu tiles talk.
I see people taking pictures.
Hi everyone.
So what you know, let's jump right in.
The idea is that I'm going to give like a pretty
short intro.
I've seen the faces here.
I think most of you already know what this is, but
like you know, at least I'm going to run through
it pretty quickly.
And then Ted and Nick or Ted or Nick or I don
't know, is going to like, I'm going to
show some really cool demos of stuff they've been building with
tiles.
So what are tiles?
Well, they're really like, you know, they're
confusing because they're so simple.
It's, you know, what if you could have like
a mini web app as like so many have tried before that
could be embedded in anything safely because it can't touch the
network.
That's essentially the whole story.
And the idea is that you remove a lot of power because
you remove network and that's significant for people who do,
you know, network things.
But this reduction in power makes it possible to use this in
many more contexts that are potentially security or privacy sensitive, such
as social media.
And so that is pretty cool, especially since the web is
pretty powerful.
So you can build like all kinds of stuff with these.
These are, you know, examples of like widgets of all
kinds that could easily be tiles.
And the thing is like, what's new about this?
Like many people have tried the web app thing before and well
, we haven't heard back from them in 20 years.
Like I remember like, if you're, if you're
, if you're, if you're, if you're
really old like me, you'll remember the XML packaging initiative
that was trying to put like XHTML and SV
G inside some kind of thing that you could run as an
app and that, you know, all that.
There have been every two to three years, the W3
C has some kind of workshop about web apps and like,
really, maybe guys, we could be solving this at some
point, perhaps.
And there's progress every time, but it's pretty slow
.
And of course, like, you know, you can always
use iframes if you don't mind like exf
iltrating a ton of information.
So, you know, this is something that, that,
that's been tried many times.
The things that, the thing that hasn't been properly tried
is just like cutting off the network.
And that's where things can, can, I think,
get quite interesting.
And so the anatomy of a tile is basically, it's
a small secluded web runtime.
It can load things that are listed in its manifest.
One of the values of tiles is that they don't have
to be in a zip file.
Like a lot of the time, like a lot of these
things like widgets, I worked on W3C widgets and
all that, they had to be in a zip, which
means that you can only start showing something after you've loaded
the whole zip, because you don't know where the index
is, you don't know if you have all the resources
you need, yada, yada.
If you have a video, your zip might be gigabytes big
, it's all, it's all problematic.
So that some people have tried to do stuff around that,
but it's usually not great.
In this case, you know, you load the manifest over
80, if they are stored on 80, or you could
load it over HTTP, it's going to be pretty small
.
And then dynamically setting up a service worker or something like that
, you see what you need to load.
And if you don't need to load everything, maybe you
're not watching the video that's included in that thing,
that's perfectly fine.
You could have like an entire archive of many things in a
tile without ever having to worry about it.
If we look at like basically, you know, this is
a pdsls of a tile that was published on
80 proto, most of the fields are pretty straightforward.
If you look, if you've seen web app manifest,
straight out of web app manifest, there's like an icon
, there's a name, there's a description.
And one thing that's specific to tiles, and that really
helps solve this idea of like content addressable apps that you
can just like move around and publish in different contexts in a
way that's completely reusable, is that it has this resources
thing that maps proper web paths.
So like slash is mapped to this like blob of HTML,
and like slash image dot whatever is mapped to like a C
ID of this.
And these things get to have proper HTTP headers.
In a lot of previous iterations of content addressed web things,
the headers were not included.
So you're getting the content, but without the HTTP headers
, you don't have the proper context, they might interpret
differently in different in different contexts.
And then you're like in a crazy world.
And so like, really, that's that's about it
.
One of the things that's great is that this example shows
them stored on 80.
But you could store this anywhere, it really doesn't matter
, because everything's content addressed throughout the stack.
So you can put them in the car file, you can
put them over HTTP, you can load them with razz
le, so you can razzle dazzle, all
of that's pretty cool.
And so essentially, you know, that's, that's
it, you know, it's just like, it's
this basically this small contained thing.
And what makes it interesting is when you start integrating it in
context and giving it extra power.
So the idea is that the embedding context can say like
, oh, hey, this tile actually, I know what
's safe for it, I can give it access to this
specific thing that I've controlled, and you're going to
see a number of demos of precisely that pattern in action.
But that's it, like, because you've removed the
power, then you can decide what you give to it.
And so I'm just going to go through a list of
like, and these are most of these are fakes,
except for a couple ones, of like, how to put
them in different contexts, like very simply, you could have
a game in your social media stream, just like in your
feed, you're scrolling by, and they're like,
oh, yeah, look, Robin posted a game.
And like, this is me playing like, you know,
like Minesweeper in the middle of the thing
, it can be embedded, it's completely safe.
And now, you know, like, I hit the book
mark button, and I've got a game installed, because
they can just like, go find it.
And then you could have like, some local curation of
stuff.
And of course, because it's loading off a PDS
, you can paywall it.
So like, there's a business model even potentially behind that
.
You can also do long form, I can give you the
slides afterwards, don't have to take pictures.
You can do long form.
So this is one of, this is a blog post I
wrote a while ago.
And so you could imagine that in a in the leaflet
kind of interface, instead of like, you know, create
using the leaflet editor, you could embed your own long
form source that has your own style and your own, you
know, pictures, fonts, etc, just like as part
of the normal of the normal leaflet publication format.
And you click that and it opens and and you just get
the blog posts.
Another thing that's interesting is you can have something called wishes
.
So if any, if any of you are familiar with like
Android intents, or web intents, or stuff like
that, it's sort of a declarative way of saying
like, hey, I'm a piece of functionality, I
'm a tile, and I need someone to edit an image
for me.
But I don't, I don't want to call a
specific program.
And I definitely don't want to do the thing where you
have to save the file to a file system.
And then the user has to like figure out what app they
want to use, and then give it back to me.
And I know that dance that's like fucking insane.
And so what you say is that is, is you say
, hey, I wish to edit.
So there's always a verb, this type of data,
and here's the data.
And it will find for you a tile that knows how to
carry out that wish.
And of course, maybe you have it installed, as we
said earlier, like bookmarking is installing, so that
that's sufficient.
But maybe it's on the network, if it was published
to AT, you can know that it's able to,
you can find things that are able to handle specific requests.
So you can use the AT data itself.
And this is just an example of like, you clicked edit
here, and it loaded the image inside a filter editor,
you know, why not?
And then when you hit save, it sends it back.
And that's that is really simple, but you can integrate
a lot of things in this way with loose coupling.
This is an example of a tile in Rumi.
The idea, and I really love this pattern, I would
love to like, when you get to that part of like
building stuff, I would love to work on that.
The idea here is that you can give tiles, and Delta
Chat does that, you can give them a way to just
write to a data channel of the channel.
And so it shares data, but only with other people who
are on the channel.
So you can install a tile to a chat.
And what's cool about that, yeah, I know,
it kind of breaks the brain.
But like, if you think, if you think about it
, like, a chat is a pair is a security perimeter
, right?
There are people who are inside the chat and can read stuff
, and people who are on the outside who can't.
And there's no reason that a chat would like only send
text messages.
Actually, they don't under the hood, they always send
structured something, right?
And so you send a different structured something that's just data
that like, and so you, you know, user install
s a tile to the chat room, every, everyone in
the chat room gets to see that tile.
And then the thing is, those things can post messages that
are basically CRDT that sync state across every instance of
the tile that people in the room see.
And so you can do something instead of like having all these
fucking doodle things that are always ugly, and like,
you lose the link, and you never know which one,
you just like in your chat, you just like drop a
time picker thing where you've like configured some options.
And anyone in the chat can answer, and it syncs
the options for everyone.
And you could do that with a document, you could have
like a shared markdown editor, like let's edit a
doc together in the chat.
So that's, you know, another thing.
Blento, you know, just like, this is like
, almost like so obvious that they, oh, man,
sorry, sorry, the thing is, I don't even
know what these guys are going to say.
So sorry about that.
Let me go faster, that way.
This, this thing, this is like, what if we
could render arbitrary content by loading a tile that has a render
wish.
And so imagine that you have like, whatever, this is
like a karaoke lexicon.
And inside of it, it has a status sphere lex
icon, and you just like want to arbitrarily render things
, you could load a tile that knows how to render this
to like so that you can do nested rendering of arbitrary
embedded lexica.
And this one is actually my favorite, it looks like,
ass like, you know, most of the things I designed
, but that's fine.
But like the idea here, and actually, I'm going
to use the real thing.
If I can find where the cursor goes, yes.
So the idea here is that they don't have to be
on AT proto, right, they can be inside a car
file.
So you can have a local file that contains a tile that
you can run in something that's like a PDF viewer.
And so you could kill PDF, because like, you know
, we should kill PDF.
But like, we don't just kill PDF by reproducing
PDF.
This is like, you know, this is basically a,
this is a presentation that I gave about tiles that was in
the tile.
And so you know, you can you can do this,
of course.
But the other thing that you can do is that you can
have self editing documents, because you can make it so that
the tile can write to a data segment in its own car
container.
And therefore, you know, this is a rich text thing
.
And I can say like, hi, folks, whatever.
And you see the little safe things here, if I close
this, and I email it to Ricardo, and he opens
it in this, and he doesn't have a rich text
editor, he just has the PDF replacement thing, then he
can open it and edit it.
And you can you can do this with, you know,
arbitrary editors.
So like, for instance, here, this MS paint,
you know, and you do this, and whatever.
And then you have an image editor that you know, I
can send it over to Ted, and he can edit the
image and, you know, yada, yada,
yada.
And so with that, we have websites, we have a
fake demo shit browser on it.
There's a it's a dazzle spec because everything's
dazzle these days.
That's how you dazzle people.
And there's some some code that you can check out on
the wonderful npmx.
And you can come to our meetings, we share stuff.
Fuck yeah tiles.
And with this I
'm going to go ahead and see what is on my screen
.
So let me just fix that.
Oh, I'm giving away the thing.
We're going to go fast.
This also is extremely unstyled, because we've been
doing this around organizing a conference.
So this is more of a tech demo, especially since Robin
has given you the dream in part, and shown a lot
of like, what we thought was really kind of cool about
web tiles.
So I'm going to run through some of the stuff quickly
, and just kind of give you a sense of where once
we saw web tiles, what we immediately thought of, right
, because the entire pitch that Robin's giving is around having
these self-contained little tiles that you know that you
can kind of pass around safely, which I think is really
an exciting idea.
And the notion of these things as pieces of context lists,
content addressed, signed data is really useful, especially when you
start thinking, well, okay, what if we reintrodu
ced a little bit of context?
What context would you want to introduce?
And so we said, well, why not think about ways
in which you could actually gain access to that protodata
directly through this?
So what we've built is a platform for being able to
create and host web tiles.
And these things are, you know, as simple as something
really goofy, like an HTML page and some JavaScript, and
they can be dragged and dropped.
And there's a reason why I'm going with a super
simple example here first, because I want to be able to
show that these are things where if you want to handcraft
something, and just upload it, and make something tiny,
quick, let's see, hello, world clock, and
we'll see you next time.
You absolutely can.
You can self-host, or you can upload these things
, host them, share them with other people.
These are embeddable, and our whole goal is to
be able to build a runtime that can provide a way to
load web tiles and connect with your app protocount simply
and easily.
So I'll switch between desktops here.
So this includes things like being able to just take an U
RI from, say, a desktop app, and also just
load the tile.
And we've been talking about all the different places in which
we could stick and embed these, whether these are within web
apps, as Robin was pointing out, social feeds embedded inside
of leaflet posts or other sorts of data structures, where
you can both be confident of the safety and security of the
app that you're embedding, and still give users access
to all of their data.
From there, though, this gets a lot more exciting.
We can do quite a lot of things with arbitrary access to
data, including crazy things like, why don't we build
embeddable media players?
This is data that is up on the protocol.
So part of the thing that we built is basically a R
azzle CDN as tiles are created and propagate through the
network.
We look at the CIDs because CIDs are
identifiers for both records and for blobs.
And we can serve them geographically.
We know that they are generally safe.
When you label a CID or an ATURI,
you know that it's not going to change, which means
that you have a certain guarantee of trust in the future.
And we can return that in chunked streaming forms in whatever
mechanisms are necessary for, you know, streaming audio, video
, etc.
And so we can also define the security boundary here pretty easily
and simply to align with the affordances of the protocol,
right?
Atproto has a capability model that allows you to define
a premium article.
Yeah.
So, for example...
And UCAN.
Yep, with UCANs and other sorts of things.
So this allows us to do some fun other things that build
on the work that we've been talking about for the past
year.
For example, being able to do gated content.
You could embed an article in, say, a social post
that goes and checks whether or not you have proof of purchase
or a subscription or a membership to a particular service.
And that actually will immediately unlock for you.
Or if you don't, right, you have a call
to action there directly.
And in this context, right, like maybe it's a
call to action to pay for the article.
And then you issue, you know, payment requests here,
say, "Yes, I'd like to pay for this
." And then it actually goes, makes an XRPC
call, proves that you've got the signature, and then
loads the rest of the content directly for that record.
Over the past several months, we've, you know,
I've published quite a bit on how and why Proto
Fans works the way it works, attestations,
and the whole concept that you can have proof of payment,
not web payments, but proof of payment on record in structured
ways.
Which means that if you are a content provider, like with
the better stack tile that we produced, your payment, your
member base of people who have paid for the one-offs
or the subscriptions, they follow you if you want to change
payment providers or not.
If you want to change your PDS, or they change
their PDS, or any combinations of identity and data mobility
, which is central to the AdProto ethos,
like this, this allows and enables that.
Yeah.
And this isn't just about connections with your PDS either
.
You can build and launch other services that can talk through X
RPC channels, and that can extend everything from like,
little sessions and being able to do real-time-ish
experiences like, why don't you give me a high five
here?
Yeah, yeah, there you go.
High fives.
Oh, I got to send the, yeah, send the
permission.
And so, you know, this provides the opportunity to do
things like actually doing games directly in feeds and other sorts of
mini multiplayer experiences.
What's really important to note that this isn't magical.
This tile is entirely sandboxed.
The tile itself is not making external API calls.
It's not, it's not breaking the boundary, right
, that we set from our security profile.
What it's doing is it's communicating with the runtime,
whether that runtime is the browser making XRPC, X
RPC requests that are authenticated and have the context of
the user, allowing for a stateless tile that is determin
istic in nature, thanks to content addressable storage.
But we have this global context of your PDS and the
XRPC calls that you can invoke.
So we can provide some structure around making, you know,
queries and procedures and WebSocket connections asynchronously to offer
this experience.
Yep.
And so we have, um, a bunch of experimental runners
, which we have been tinkering with, like for
example, this Rust, uh, desktop based one.
So now we have a, uh, well, okay.
Don't have the permission for it.
All right.
Well, it's a little strict.
Sometimes there's a query string parameter to allow for create and
destruct methods.
So we'll go back to using the web, web version
of this.
Um, uh, uh, uh, and let's see
, hello.
Uh,
these are all, um, individual aircrafts.
Hangar, uh, software is Han and Jared Ennis
.
Yeah.
Just sort of fit.
And so, right.
Like these are a little full apps that can, you can
, uh, post and do anything you want with.
So, um, so, um, the, the two
things, I mean, and Robin's kind of given the
game away here, but one of the things that were no
, no, it's perfect.
Like that was great.
Um, being able to talk about where we want to put
all of these tiles and how can we share these?
Um, my thesis around this is having good structures allow for
people to be able to experiment more.
And so, you know, I started out with like a
little goofy, um, app that you can like hand code
if you want, but also like, this is a great
place to safely be able to experiment with apps and plug,
clawed in and say, go for it.
Um, Um, you can read lexicons out of
the, um, lexicon garden MCP and give
people capabilities to tinker with data, have front end,
um, capabilities on top of the app proto stack and basically
be able to, um, uh, grow the types of
things and the, the, the access to other communities for
building new apps.
To, to check the little agentic AI checkbox that
's now required everywhere.
Yeah.
The difference between an MCP application and a web tile is
the runtime.
So we right now there's this service is actually an MC
P.
So if you authenticate in and say, load the hello
world tile or load the create, the create post tile,
it will use the same structure, the same, the exact
same runtime structure to make XR authenticated XRPC
calls from within your agent to do things like create posts,
make XRPC calls, et cetera.
And that means that we have broad, broad distribution.
Anyone can say, Hey, I want to have an allow
list of tiles that are going into Rumi, or Hey
, I want to have a standalone website that displays some of
this content and, and, uh, has a runner that
supports this payment method specific to this content provider.
Right.
Uh, and that same tile can then work on a mobile
device.
It can work on a desktop app.
You can have a local car file with a dual car,
uh, you know, basically data payload that you can give
to someone else to load that local data.
It's truly distributed content.
And we think that's pretty cool.
Let's bring back mixtapes.
Yes.
Um, okay.
We've got like a minute.
Any questions?
Okay.
This is awesome.
You guys, like I've wanted to do this 15 years
ago.
Uh, so, uh, um, um, the,
um, uh, basically what I wanted to do is actually
put charts, interactive charts or maps in a feed.
Okay.
Um, my question is, uh, with regards to security
, uh, so you, uh, I'm, I
'm, I'm, I'm guessing you can run a
JavaScript here within, right?
So how does it cross boundaries with like, if there's
content security policy, how does that work?
Oh, yeah.
So basically, uh, when the tile runner, uh,
gets a manifest, it takes that content.
And because it's a CID that's recognized and listed
in the blob, the, the, uh, runtime is
varying it down and then it's loaded.
And that's the same way any assets are, are referenced
as well.
So like the image gallery one, could you pop that up
?
Yep.
Um, image gallery, whether it's JavaScript images, media
, et cetera, the, the runtime is making these calls
to determine what can be fed into the, the sandbox.
The other thing about this is, um, each one of
these tiles, um, uh, the way that we host
them is actually giving them each a, um, their own
subdomain, uh, based on the CID.
So, um, they're actually sandbox based on origin.
Yeah.
Like a synthetic origin.
Yes.
A synthetic origin.
Yeah.
Non-deterministic to make it more difficult to,
you know, avoid two people somehow getting the rent, the
same DNS and having the chance that there's contamination.
You have a question.
Are you, are you using wishes in your message channel here
or a different type of messaging channel?
Cause tiles, maybe you can use it.
So it's, so wish wishes.
And please do correct me if I'm wrong here.
Wishes represent the intention of a user to take an action
that may involve other tiles.
This is, uh, this is adjacent to it and it
's specifically XRPC calls within the, the Ad Pr
oto ecosystem.
So it's, it's not, uh, conflicting and
could support it.
We could, we could look at what layering of tiles or
navigation or any, or the wishes concepts look like.
Uh, yeah.
That wishes are much more for the use case of like arbitrary
composition.
It's, it's, the idea is really task-
based computing.
So you don't, you want your, your, your
thing needs to carry out a task.
It doesn't know who else can answer that task.
And then that means you have like open-ended composition,
uh, instead of having apps because apps suck.
Um, oh, and one, one small thing I wanted
to add, I didn't have time to add it to
my presentation.
Some person I'd never met or interacted with, uh,
the other day on, on blue sky said, Oh,
this seems interesting.
I'll integrate it.
And then the following day they shipped a server based browser that
supports tile.
So, you know, it's coming.
That's awesome.
For clarification, I was asking so that people would know you
don't have to use wishes.
You can use all kinds of things.
Uh, is hanger open source?
Uh, parts of it are, yeah.
Uh, we, we intend on open sourcing parts of
it.
Um, but, uh, there's a bunch of different
components that were, yeah, we, we think that there
's, um, potential value to the community ecosystem to,
uh, open source, both the runtime and the CDN
, uh, but then make some of the extra PC services
specific to payment processing or other things, you know, the
secret sauce of how this thing can like sustain itself.
Okay.
One last question.
I think we got to wrap up.
Yeah.
Um, forgive my ignorance.
This is the first time I've ever heard of web tiles
.
Is this a W3C?
Is this supported in all browsers?
Is this a wasm thing?
What is the runtime, I guess?
Uh, so I, I mean, it, it,
this is not a W3C thing, but like the
runtime is like a web runtime.
So it's, it, it, it works in the
browser.
Um, the, the container itself is not a W3
C standard.
It's a dazzle standard.
So, I mean, if you want to call dazzle
standards, but like it's, it's along the same
suite of stuff that powers the rest of 80.
Yeah, no, this is, this works in the browser
today.
Yeah.
And, uh, the, the key things here are web
tiles are standard.
Um, the runtime that we're talking about is a thing
that loads web tiles and has the message channel for being able
to connect to your app proto account.
Um, or, uh, yeah, I, I think
there's a lot of room to standardize and create more
formality around what runtimes do and don't support.
Um, and the Maslow documents is, is actually,
it's, it's, it's simple and plain complimentary
, right?
It, it does exactly what you'd expect by defining what
resources we're using CIDs, uh, content address
able storage references or links, uh, to, to tell
you what it needs to load and how, and then it
's up to the runtime to implement it.
So think of it as like the PDS is a collection
of XRPC services.
It's not really a formal spec, but you do have
a general shape of what it looks like.
It's very similar.
And, and also like generally, I mean, the way
we do specs and dazzle, we do small specs that
do one thing, do it well.
And that way you implement what you need to implement for that
.
So like the tile spec is like tiny and it's just
tiles, but like the wishes spec is going to be separate
from that.
And like it, it's only wishes you could do like
task-based computing in other contexts.
Um, but also, um, uh, you know,
various environments.
So for instance, I, I demoed, like I
demoed, like I showed like roomie integration, you
could have a, a chat context integration.
And like, if roomie integrates it and say,
I'm making this up matrix integrates it, you could
use the same tiles in both.
Yeah.
We're like 10 minutes, 10 minutes into the one minute
.
Yeah.
We're, we're now in the bonus round.
Um, this is the coffee break.
So please be free should you want to be.
Um, otherwise, if you would like to talk about tiles
more, let's go.